---
title: Senior Thesis
description: A thesis in support of the right to repair I wrote in my senior year
date: 2024/02/13
tags:
  - Schoolwork
  - Thesis
---

_This draft is incomplete. It was last updated on 12 February 2024. I also still need to get citations working._

In 1924 lightbulb manufacturers had a problem—their light bulbs were too good. The manufacturers competed to make the best light bulb, but at the same time raced to the bottom as the better light bulbs would last longer, thus causing people to not need to buy light bulbs as often. In 1924, lightbulbs lasted an average of 2500 hours and were only getting better. The Phoebus Cartel was formed to stop this. Eight of the largest companies met together to form this cartel, including some companies still around today, such as Philips, General Electric, Tokyo Electric, and Osram. Companies in the cartel would have to send samples of their bulbs to a laboratory in Switzerland. If any companies were found producing a better light bulb, they would be given a hefty fine. Together they worked against consumers and lowered the average lightbulb lifespan to only 1000 hours. While the start of World War Two broke up the cartel, its legacy lives on in modern planned obsolescence.

Planned Obsolescence is when products are deliberately designed to become unusable so that the consumer needs to purchase another one in the future. It can come in many forms, but the most egregious is deliberately designing products that are impossible to repair. This can come in the form of patronizing manuals that say “Repairs performed by untrained individuals or using non-genuine Apple parts may affect the safety and functionality of the device,” or “tamper resistant” pentalobe screws that need a special screwdriver to unscrew. Additionally, these companies will fight back against laws that protect the right to repair. For example, in Washington’s 2021 Right to Repair Bill, which would make these practices more difficult, there were zero actual citizens voting against it. The only opposition came from Microsoft backed lobbyists, who would lose money from this law.

The government has also noticed these difficulties. In May of 2021, the FTC released a report titled “Nixing the Fix” about many of these issues. They found that, “many consumer products have become harder to maintain. Repairs today often require specialized tools, difficult-to-obtain parts, and access to proprietary diagnostic software. Consumers whose products break then have limited choices.” Additionally, John Deer is currently fighting lawsuits from more than 17 farmers claiming that they have a monopoly on repair.

Consumers have continued to voice their desire for repair as well. The largest evidence of this comes from a study consisting of 8403 consumers with repair experiences from 2013 showed that the ease of repairing a broken product had a large positive effect on the opinion of the product. However, repairability has major barriers to it, including a lack of access to parts, tools, and manuals. As shown by a study by Pew Research, minorities and lower income families are more likely to be smartphone dependent. This means that if their smartphone breaks, they are completely out of luck. This lack of access is mostly artificial. Companies would rather see you throw away your old product and buy a new one than repair your current one. If you do choose to repair, they want to make sure that they are the only ones making a profit from it.

Support for the right to repair has been on the rise. The states Colorado, California, New York, and Minnesota have all passed right to repair laws for consumer electronics. Most of them just went into effect this January (note: this refers to January 2024), so there isn’t any data on their effect. Outside of the United States, France implemented a repairability index on January 1 2021. This is a 1-10 scale that indicates the repairability and longevity of a product. The scale is based on a variety of factors, including the availability of documentation, the types of tools needed, and the availability of spare parts. They state that the goal is to combat waste and to “raise consumer’s awareness of the possibility of extending the lifespan and use of their devices, in particular by directing their purchase behavior towards products that are more easily repairable and by encouraging them to resort more to repairs in the event of a breakdown.” The iPhone 13 Pro has a 6.2/10 rating, while the MacBook Pro 13 has a 5.6/10 rating. A report by Halt Obsolescence showed that 55% of people are familiar with the index, and three fourths of consumers in contact with the index used it to make a purchasing decision. This shows that consumers want to repair their products when given the information.

To solve this lack of repair, we need two things: a repairability index to give consumers more information about the longevity of their products, and legislation that guarantees access to documentation, parts, and tools at a fair and reasonable price. The legislation would be covered by laws such as Texas’ HB515 and HB1616. The repairability index and legislation would support small businesses, support consumers, and protect the environment.

While the seller of your device may be the first place you think to go for a repair, they aren’t always the best. From a pirg survey of independent repair shops, nearly every single one of the participants said that they were able to fix a device that the manufacturer couldn’t (92%) and that they were able to fix that product for a lower price (98%). This higher skill from independent shops isn’t just self reported. Take Greg Benz for example—he had a common issue where the display on his Macbook kept going dark. After the Apple geniuses (this isn’t sarcasm. That’s actually what they’re called) troubleshot for a while, they gave up and sent the laptop to Texas for repair and gave Benz a temporary computer. However, this new laptop began to have the same issue a few months later. Again, Benz took this new laptop to the genius bar again, where they eventually realized that the display brightness was just on zero. After 2 replaced logic boards, $10,000, troubleshooting from several apple geniuses, diagnostic tests at Apple’s repair facility, and 2 weeks of lost time; the issue turned out to be the equivalent of the screen just not being turned on. While this is technically a situation of user error, you would expect the Apple Geniuses to be able to not fall into this same silly pitfall. The verdict is in—the incentivized local businesses are more competent than the disincentivized manufacturers.

Despite this higher skill of the independent repair shops, the manufacturers still get to win. From that same survey, about half of the repair shops surveyed said they frequently have to turn away customers due to manufacturers refusing to sell parts to them, while the other half said they occasionally have to. Only a measly 9 shops out of the 253 surveyed said that they are always able to get the parts they need. Continuing with that line of reasoning, nearly every one of the shops surveyed said that they strongly support the right to repair laws, and that their business might be in danger without them. The proposed legislation would give these businesses access to the parts and documentation they need, and a repairability index would incentivize consumers to buy more repairable products and therefore support the businesses.

Some companies offer what they call “authorized repair programs” that theoretically allow the independent shops to gain access to the parts and documentation they need. However, these often act less like symbiotic relationships and more like shackles on the repair shop. The Guardian spoke to a number of independent repair shops from the US and Australia who were in this program and found many flaws. First of all, it can take up to six months for applications to go through, despite the 8 weeks that Apple promises. Additionally, the price of the replacement parts is too high for the shops to stay afloat. One owner said “After you take off labor and rent, what is left? We are losing money.” None of this is any accident—Apple isn’t going to willingly support it’s own competition. Currently, these businesses have no choice but to pledge fealty to the original manufacturer and suffer the consequences. However, if a repairability index is established and businesses can access the parts they need fairly, the death grip will be released and the small businesses will stop choking.

Due to the artificial restrictions on repair, these local repair shops have been choking to death. For example, in 1966, there were 310,000 people employed in home appliance and television repair. Today, there are only 70,000. All of this occurred while the US population increased from about 190 million to 340 million. With some quick math, this is approximately 500,000 jobs we’re missing out on due to the lack of repairability. Additionally, these aren’t low skilled manufacturing jobs, but highly skilled and hard to automate trades. Repair jobs are also more local than the manufacturing jobs they would replace. 500,000 might even be a low estimate, given how much more dependent we are on these devices than from the 60s. Wouldn’t it be ridiculous if you went to the mechanic to get your transmission repaired, and they couldn’t fix it because the manufacturer of the car didn’t let them buy the parts?

The environment is another crucial aspect of repair. EWaste is a massive environmental problem. It may not appear that bad on paper, since it only makes up 2% of trash dumped. However, this miniscule 2% accounts for 70% of all toxic waste. We dispose of around 150 million mobile phones every year. To put this number into perspective, these phones stacked on top of each other (assuming each phone has a width of 1 cm) would make a stack 1000 miles long, about the distance from Houston to Phoenix.

This toxic waste can poison the communities it sits in. For example, a study by the New Delhi Department of Civil engineering found that heavy metal concentration near e-waste sites is 30 times higher than normal in topsoil, and 120 times higher than normal for subsoil. The full effects of this contamination are still being researched, but the consensus is that it is definitely harmful. Studies have shown that it can be linked to abnormal reproductive development, premature births and stillbirths, as well as child developmental issues. Additionally, the e-waste is typically dumped in still developing and poorer countries. This is just exploitation.

Corporations point at recycling as the solution to this issue, but it’s still far from effective. In Apple’s 2019 recycling report, they claim that with the use of their cutting edge Daisy recycling robot, they were able to recycle 48,000 metric tons of e waste. While this may seem like an impressive number, it only accounts for 0.1% of the e waste produced by Apple. Additionally, not much is actually being put into the recycling process. In their 2019 Environmental Responsibility Report, Apple says that they were able to recycle one million iPhones. Again, this seems impressive, but only represents half of a percent of the phones they sold this year. The steps Apple is taking to make recycling more efficient are admirable, but recycling doesn’t need to be an alternative to repair. Recycling should happen when a product is truly at the end of its life or becomes hopelessly outdated, not just after one year of use.

We aren’t just consuming electronics inefficiently, but producing them inefficiently as well. A single 4.5 ounce iPhone requires 75 lbs of ore and 100 liters of water. This is using 20 days worth of water for the average person and the weight of 75 1 lb weights to make one device the weight of a pack of playing cards. It’s also important to note that the production of a single laptop produces 1000 lbs of CO2. As Aaron Perzanowski said in his book The Right to Repair, “When you buy a new laptop, the sticker price doesn’t fully account for the rivers poisoned by rare-earth mining, the health hazards of air pollution from gold and nickel mining, and the exploitation of workers.”.

The ethics and fairness surrounding production brings up issues as well. The city of Baotou in Chinese inner Mongolia is a depressing example of this. It has recently exploded as demand for rare earth metals has gone up. These are elements such as Yttrium, Cerium, Dysprosium, and Neodymium which are crucial to the inner workings of our tech. The area around Baotou is very rich and is estimated to contain 70% of the world’s reserves, but at a great humanitarian cost. The production of these metals destroys the local environment—leaving an alien toxic lake filled with the byproduct of all of the metal extraction. This lake seeps into the local groundwater, poisoning the whole city. By keeping our products for longer we can help end the terrible abuse that happens in these developing cities

Cobalt is another example of a natural resource that’s being overproduced. The Democratic Republic of the Congo contains around 60% of the world’s supply of this resource, which is used in the lithium-ion batteries in our laptops, phones, and even cars. It is also used in the production of gas turbines, jet engines, and magnetic steel. However, the price we pay for these products is not just monetary. Take Elodie for example. She’s a 15 year old teen mom who has to carry her two month old son every day through the cobalt mines. She spends all day bent over inhaling the toxic fumes, trying to dig up enough cobalt to fill her sack. In one day, she only makes about 65 cents. Stories like hers are not uncommon. Again, these are complex problems that require complex solutions, but every time we choose to replace instead of repair we are forcing more orphan children into toxic and grueling work.

Of course, none of this would matter if repair can’t actually help. However, a study from Oakdene Hollins on how Microsoft devices could reduce emissions showed that repairing the product instead of replacing it can create up to a 92% reduction in potential waste generation and emissions. This of course would not be a silver bullet to instantly solve all of the environmental and humanitarian problems, but a 92% reduction in e waste is not insignificant and would create cascading results throughout. By seeking to repair rather than replace, and by passing laws that make that easier and incentivize companies to do so, we can take better care of the world God has given us.

Benefits to small businesses and the environment are great, but the most benefit will come to us—the consumers. The most obvious benefit is the economic one. The average US household spends almost $2000 on electronics per year. According to a report by PIRG, if we extend the lifespan of these products by using repair, that same family would save 23% of that, which turns out to be a little under $400 per year for the average family. Across the 129 million households in the US, this adds up to around $50 billion dollars—enough to buy 100 million pounds of bananas—that could be put to use stimulating the local economy, rather than lining the pockets of already large companies. Repair is an economic win for the consumer.

Even with the overpriced repair we deal with today, consumers are still able to save money. Take for example screen repairs. In 2017, Americans broke 50 million phone screens, which is about 2 broken screens every second. If all of these were repaired by the Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) for an average of $170, it would cost Americans about $8.5 billion. If each of these purchases resulted in buying new phones, however, it would cost around $20 billion. It could be better, however. While Apple charges between $150-$170 for repairs of phone screens around that time, an independent repair shop such as Rossman Repair group, a repair shop near the University of Texas, charges only between $80 and $120. If instead consumers went to them, it would cost a total of $4.5 billion, saving consumers $4 billion on phone repair. This is without considering what would be gained from this law, meaning that the savings could be even greater.

Another large benefit will be cheaper repair, which will in turn cause our products to last longer. We currently throw out products that are still working just fine and deal with overpriced repair. From 2000 to 2017, the price of repairing a vehicle has increased 60% when accounting for inflation. The cost of replacement parts are inflating, and GM is reporting a 30% profit margin on aftermarket parts. Apple certainly has the right to charge whatever they please, and they probably should. However, deliberately inhibiting the ability of other companies to even compete is monopolistic.

None of these issues of auto parts are as bad as John Deere. John Deere makes 5 times more from repairs as they do from sales. They also use artificial software locks to prevent repair, causing farmers to use hacked Ukrainian software to even use their tractors. If a company makes more from broken products than they are from working ones, they are directly incentivized to make products that break more and are lower quality. Right to repair laws give the companies that make the best products the most success.

A common counterpoint to the idea of repairable products is the idea that if the company doesn’t make as much from repair, the up front price will go up. This will be true on the frontend: for people buying new products straight off of the shelf, you can expect to see a significant price increase. However, the secondhand market will see a huge gain, similar to the way cars work. For example, twice as many used cars are sold each year than new cars. People who can afford it and want to can still buy a new iPhone every year, just the old one will continue to live a long second life on the secondhand market. WIth greater repairability our electronic equipment can go from disposable and consumable to having the longevity we see in cars.

While the economic benefits to consumers are the main benefit, it’s important not to forget the cultural ones. As Aaron Perzanowski says in his book The Right to Repair, “Once you understand how a technology works, why it fails, and how it can be repaired, the leap to developing an improvement is a small one.” A culture of builders rather than buyers will lead to a new age of American innovation. Today’s fixers are tomorrow's innovators.

Some may account for the decrease in repair jobs and repairability in general by the increased complexity and miniaturization of our products. However, this isn’t necessarily true. Take Jessica Jones for example. After her toddler flushed her phone down the toilet, she broke the toilet open with a sledgehammer, determined to recover the precious memories saved on it. After two years of work, she became an expert in microsoldering, and now runs a repair shop with several other stay at home parents called “IPad Rehab.” Since 2012, her team has fixed over 10,000 logic boards that Apple claims to be permanently lost. She is now a fervent advocate of Right to Repair legislation and runs a training course for microsoldering. When things are broken, hardworking and determined people will always rise up to fix them. According to Apple, people like Mrs. Jones are too incompetent and irresponsible to repair their mythically complex devices.

Manufacturers have worked hard and invested lots into creating these products, so another common argument is that their “unfair” advantage in the repair section is actually their just booty for creating a useful product. The reality is that this law doesn’t take away their advantage, it just forces them to compete fairly. When your iPhone breaks, the first place you’ll think to go to is the Apple store. That will still be the case after this law, there will just be other alternatives. However, you won’t ever look at those alternatives if Apple provides a good service at a reasonable price. They still have the advantage, but just have to compete fairly.

As consumers and citizens of Texas, we have multiple paths to getting the repair that we deserve. First, we can support HB515 and HB1616 in the Texas House of Representatives. These laws would ensure that consumers of both small electronic devices and heavy equipment, such as farm equipment, would have access to the parts, tools, and documentation they need. Additionally, we also need a repairability index to allow consumers to make informed decisions about their products.

Legislation can set repair up, but it is ultimately up to the consumer to capitalize on it. For us this means seeking to repair our products rather than replace them. When we do repair, we should seek to use highly skilled local workers, rather than going straight to the manufacturer. When we eventually have to purchase new products, we should ensure that the product is repairable. Repairability has been a corollary of ownership since the concept has existed. We cannot let manufacturers redefine what ownership means.
